Here, we show a project report that we wrote based on the training.py, app.py and the confusion matrix and ROC curve pictures:

📄 Project Report: Credit Card Fraud Detection with XGBoost  

Introduction

With more and more transactions occurring digitally, credit card scams are a growing issue. Early identification of such fraudulent activities is important for banks to avoid any losses. In this project machine learning is used for detection of fraudulent transactions based on transaction features.

Abstract

This is a project to fit a supervised-learning model across anonymized transactions to spot credit card fraud. The dataset is extremely imbalanced, with a small number of the cases such as fraudulent cases and the legitimate ones. The workflow contains data preprocessing, class imbalance, model training that depends on XGBoost, evaluates based on classification metrics, and deploying the model using s Streamlit- based web application

Tools Used

Python

XGBoost Classifier

Scikit-learn

Pandas & NumPy

Matplotlib & Seaborn

Imbalanced-learn

Streamlit

Steps to develop the project

a. Data Preprocessing:

Loaded the creditcard. csv dataset.

I dropped the Time column and scaled the Amount feature with StandardScaler.

b. Class Imbalance Handling:

Applied RandomUnderSampler to balance the dataset as the cases of fraud were few.

c. Model Training:

Used XGBClassifier with eval_metric='logloss'.

Divide the data (80% train, 20% test) and trained the model.

d. Evaluation:

Performed good with AUC score of 0.97.

Generated a confusion matrix and ROC curve to demonstrate performance.

e. Deployment:

Developed an interactive Streamlit app for transaction details (V1–V28 and amount).

The app uses the trained model to predict if a transaction is fraudulent or legitimate.

🔍 Visual Results: 

Confusion Matrix

ROC Curve

The visual results like the confusion matrix and ROC curve are generated during the model evaluation phase after the model is trained.


